                                                         COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES
                                                                                   JULES HEDGES
arXiv:1704.02230v3 [math.CT] 15 Sep 2017




                                                  Abstract. Categories of polymorphic lenses in computer science, and of open games
                                                  in compositional game theory, have a curious structure that is reminiscent of compact
                                                  closed categories, but differs in some crucial ways. Specifically they have a family of
                                                  morphisms that behave like the counits of a compact closed category, but have no
                                                  corresponding units; and they have a ‘partial’ duality that behaves like transposition
                                                  in a compact closed category when it is defined. We axiomatise this structure, which
                                                  we refer to as a ‘teleological category’. We precisely define a diagrammatic language
                                                  suitable for these categories, and prove a coherence theorem for them. This underpins
                                                  the use of diagrammatic reasoning in compositional game theory, which has previously
                                                  been used only informally.


                                           1. Introduction
                                           Open games [11, 13] are a foundation for economic game theory which is strongly compo-
                                           sitional: games are built from simple components using uniform composition operators.
                                           More speciﬁcally, open games are the morphisms of a symmetric monoidal category in
                                           which categorical composition is a primitive form of sequential play, and the monoidal
                                           product is a primitive form of simultaneous play. Open games can be thought of as ‘games
                                           open along a boundary’, and in particular ordinary (extensive-form) games arise as the
                                           scalars (endomorphisms of the monoidal unit [2]) in the category of open games. Compo-
                                           sitional game theory thus shares the same motivation and philosophy as the more general
                                           research programme of open systems [8].
                                               Being morphisms in a monoidal category, open games support a diagrammatic no-
                                           tation. It was noticed early that these diagrams have a curious structure intermediate
                                           between symmetric monoidal categories and compact closed categories [25]: wires can
                                           bend in one direction but not the other, and some (but not all) morphisms can be ro-
                                           tated around a bend. Because of their formal diﬀerences to known classes of diagrams,
                                           they have previously been used only as an informal intuition. This paper remedies this
                                           situation by deﬁning these diagrams precisely and proving a coherence theorem for them.
                                               In order to state a coherence theorem we must ﬁrst axiomatise the properties of open
                                           games that are visible in the diagrammatic language. To this end we deﬁne a class of
                                           monoidal categories called teleological categories. Thus the main goals of this paper are,
                                           ﬁrstly, to prove that the category of open games is a teleological category, and secondly,
                                           to prove that a suitable category of diagrams modulo equivalences is equivalent to the
                                           free teleological category over a signature.
                                               It should be noted that there is no expectation that the diagrammatic language of

                                               c Jules Hedges, . Permission to copy for private use granted.

                                                                                             1
2                                      JULES HEDGES

open games is complete in any useful sense. That is to say, there are games that should
be considered equivalent, whose diagrams are not equivalent up to deformation. A simple
example of this is the fact that games (with pure strategies) are invariant under monotone
transformations of utility functions, that is to say, only the ordering of outcomes matters.
Even the classiﬁcation of 2 × 2 bimatrix games up to equivalence is very involved [12],
and there is no accepted theory of equivalences of games in general. Current work of
the author on morphisms between open games, with an associated graphical language of
surface diagrams, is an attempt to work towards this. However, it cannot be ruled out
that a useful theory of equivalences of open games could be axiomatised using only the
2-dimensional language of teleological categories, with suﬃcient ingenuity.
    As a secondary goal we identity other examples of teleological categories, of which
a particularly interesting example is a certain category of lenses [9], or more precisely,
polymorphic lenses with no lens laws imposed. There is a surprising and close relation-
ship between open games and lenses, which arise in programming languages and database
theory, in the study of ‘bidirectional transformations’ (or ‘bx’ for short) [10]. (This con-
nection was noticed by Jeremy Gibbons.) Indeed lenses can be used to factor and simplify
the deﬁnition of open games: polymorphic lenses without lens laws turn out to be equiva-
lent to the ‘strategically trivial’ open games [13, section 2.2.11], which could also be called
zero-player open games. This connection also reveals new facts about lenses: for example,
eﬀects (or co-states, that is, morphisms into the monoidal unit) in the monoidal category
of lenses turn out to be continuations [13, section 2.2.11].
    The possibility of using string diagrams as a syntax for lenses was mentioned in [14]
but does not appear to have been explored further. (They are used superﬁcially in [1], for
example.) A formalisation of these diagrams, at least for the notion of polymorphic lens
used in this paper, follows from the coherence theorem for teleological categories. In the
resulting graphical language, a string bending around corresponds to a degenerate lens
that focusses ‘outside’ of a data structure, into the unit type.
    Regarding the name, it is possible to view variants of monoidal categories as embodying
diﬀerent theories of causality. In the simplest case of circuit diagrams for symmetric
monoidal categories, an edge between an earlier node α and a later node β represents
a causal relationship where β is in the ‘causal future’ of α. More complicated variants
such as compact closed and †-categories complicate this, and introduce a sort of ‘quantum
causality’ (see for example [5]). Teleological categories are intended to similarly axiomatise
Aristotle’s ﬁnal case or ‘telos’ [7], which is the causality due to agents (in a very loose
sense) striving towards a goal. Teleology is a key ingredient separating social science from
physical science, and this is an attempt to put it on a proper mathematical foundation.
This viewpoint and terminology were originally suggested by Viktor Winschel in the
context of open games.
Outline of the paper. We begin in section 2 by recalling the diagrammatic language
and coherence theorem for symmetric monoidal categories. The next two sections discuss
the motivating examples: open games in section 3 and lenses in section 4. Section 5
abstracts these to give the deﬁnition of a teleological category, and gives other examples.
                       COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                   3
Section 6 deﬁnes the diagrammatic language for teleological categories, and in section 7
we state and prove the coherence theorem.
Acknowledgements. I would like to thank Dan Marsden for discussions about diagrams
and coherence, and Jeremy Gibbons for noticing that I was redeveloping the theory of
lenses from scratch under a diﬀerent name, and introducing me to the relevant literature.


2. Circuit diagrams and string diagrams
In this paper we following the naming convention of Coecke, using the term ‘string dia-
gram’ to refer speciﬁcally to diagrams for compact closed categories, and refer to diagrams
for monoidal categories as ‘circuit diagrams’. (That name is in reference to the circuit
model of quantum computation.) Extending this, we will later introduce the term ‘tele-
ological diagram’ to refer to the intermediate notion suitable for teleological categories.
However this distinction is purely for clarity of exposition, and it is common to refer to
all of these notions as ‘string diagrams’ when there is no danger of ambiguity.
    In this section we recall the formal theory of circuit diagrams. We refer to [19] for
a precise deﬁnition in terms of topological graphs with boundary. Roughly speaking, a
diagram is a graph that is smoothly embedded in some R×[a, b] (where the ﬁrst coordinate
is the ‘space direction’ and the second the ‘time direction’). Nodes are partitioned into the
‘internal nodes’, which are in R × (a, b), and the ‘external nodes’, which are in R × {a, b}
and have the additional property that they are adjacent to exactly one edge. The internal
nodes correspond to ordinary nodes in the sense of a string diagram (which will be labelled
by symbols for morphisms), while the external nodes represent the intersection of an edge
with a boundary of the diagram.
2.1. Definition. [19, 25] A monoidal signature (also called a tensor scheme) Σ consists
of sets Obj(Σ), Mor(Σ) of object symbols and morphism symbols, together with, for each
morphism symbol f , a pair of words dom(f ), cod(f ) over Obj(Σ). If dom(f ) = x1 . . . xm
and cod(f ) = y1 . . . yn then we write

                             f : x1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xm → y1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ yn

and we write I for the empty word.
    A valuation v of a monoidal signature Σ in a monoidal category C, written v : Σ → C,
consists of a choice of object v(x) of C for each object symbol x, and a choice of morphism
v(f ) of C for each morphism symbol f , such that if f : x1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xm → y1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ yn then

                     v(f ) : v(x1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ v(xm ) → v(y1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ v(yn )

2.2. Definition. [19] Let Σ be a monoidal signature. A circuit diagram (also called a
progressive polarised diagram) over Σ is a diagram in which edges are labelled by object
symbols, and internal nodes are labelled by morphism symbols so that the labels of edges
adjacent to an f -labelled node match dom(f ) and cod(f ). If f : x1 ⊗· · ·⊗xm → y1 ⊗· · ·⊗yn
we draw an f -labelled node as
4                                            JULES HEDGES


                                          xm                   yn
                                           ..                   ..
                                            .        f           .
                                          x1                   y1


although this is only a typographical convention, and in reality nodes are points. Addi-
tionally, circuit diagrams must be progressive: Edges cannot bend around in the time-
direction, which can be formalised by requiring that each edge intersects each time-slice
R × {y} of the diagram at most once.
    It will additionally be helpful to think of external nodes as labelled by a single distin-
guishing symbol that is not in Mor(Σ), say ∗.
    Every internal node in a circuit diagram A determines a partition of its adjacent
edges into input and output edges, and determines an ordering on both classes. We write
α : e1 ⊗· · ·⊗em → e′1 ⊗· · ·⊗e′n , where α refers to an internal node and ei , e′j to its adjacent
edges (and not their labels). The diagram itself also determines an ordering on its input
and output external nodes, and we write A : e1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ em → e′1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ e′n , where the edges
are those adjacent to the external nodes. Two diagrams over the same signature which
agree in this way on their common boundary can be composed by deleting the external
nodes on that boundary and linking their adjacent edges into a single edge. Diagrams
can also be composed side-by-side, with no restrictions.
    Equivalences of circuit diagrams can be deﬁned in several equivalent ways [19, 25]. In
particular, there is a ‘geometric’ deﬁnition in terms of isotopy (or continuous deformation),
and also a discrete graph-theoretic deﬁnition. We will explicitly spell out the discrete
notion, which is known as isomorphism of diagrams, in order that we can later give a
variation that is suitable for teleological categories.
2.3. Definition. Let A and B be circuit diagrams in R×[a, b] over a monoidal signature
Σ. An isomorphism i : A ∼ =c B is a label-preserving bijection between the nodes of A and
B, and a label-preserving bijection between the edges of A and B, both written i, such that

    • For each internal node α of A, α : e1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ em → e′1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ e′n iff i(α) : i(e1 ) ⊗
      · · · ⊗ i(em ) → i(e′1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(e′n )

    • For each external node β of A, β is adjacent to edge e iff i(β) is adjacent to edge
      i(e)

    • A : e1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ em → e′1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ e′n iff B : i(e1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(em ) → i(e′1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(e′n )
   ∼
   =c -equivalence classes of circuit diagrams over Σ form the morphisms of a strict sym-
metric monoidal category Dc (Σ), whose objects are words over Obj(Σ). This category
carries an obvious valuation vΣ : Σ → Dc (Σ).
                      COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                5

2.4. Theorem. [Joyal-Street coherence theorem [19, 25]] Let Σ be a monoidal signature,
C a symmetric monoidal category and w : Σ → C a valuation. Then there exists a
symmetric monoidal functor F : Dc (Σ) → C such that w = F ◦ vΣ , unique up to unique
monoidal natural isomorphism.
   The functor F is the ‘obvious’ extension of the valuation w from a signature to its
category of diagrams, by computing compositionally. The importance of this theorem is
that it proves that this informal deﬁnition of F is in fact well-deﬁned, in the sense of
being invariant up to equivalences of circuit diagrams.


3. Open games
Open games provide the motivating example of a teleological category. A detailed under-
standing of open games is not necessary to read this paper, however, and so this section
will provide a non-technical introduction. We will also informally introduce the diagram-
matic notation for open games as it has previously been used, which will be formalised in
sections 6 and 7. For interested readers, the most detailed exposition of open games can
be found in [13].
    Let X, Y, R, S be nonempty sets. (The requirement of nonemptiness does not appear
in earlier references, but can be added harmlessly.) By deﬁnition, an open game G :
(X, S) → (Y, R) consists of the following data:

   • A set ΣG of strategy profiles

   • A play function PG : ΣG × X → Y

   • A coplay function CG : ΣG × X × R → S

   • A best response function BG : X × (Y → R) → (ΣG → P(ΣG ))

A general open game is depicted in the diagrammatic language as

                                 S                      R
                                            G
                                 X                      Y

    There is a symmetric monoidal category Game whose objects are pairs of nonempty
sets, and whose morphisms are equivalence classes of open games after quotienting by
compatible isomorphisms of strategy sets. (More generally, open games form a symmetric
monoidal bicategory whose 2-cells are compatible morphisms between strategy sets.)
    We will introduce three particular families of examples. It would take us too far aﬁeld
to fully deﬁne them and discuss the intuition behind the deﬁnitions, so see [13, sections
2.1.7 – 2.1.9] for this.
6                                    JULES HEDGES

    As a ﬁrst example, there is a family of open games D : (X, 1) → (Y, R) called deci-
sions, which represent a single player making a single utility-maximising decision. This
is denoted by one of the diagrams

                                       R                                   R
                X          D                                       D
                                      Y                                    Y

with the second being the case X = 1, when the player makes no observation, for example
in a bimatrix game. (Triangles are commonly used to denote morphisms into or out of
the monoidal unit in a diagram, but this is purely a typographical convention.)
    A second family of examples are computations, which lift functions into the category of
games. A function f : X → Y , for X, Y nonempty sets, has two associated computations:
a covariant one f : (X, 1) → (Y, 1), and a contravariant one f ∗ : (1, Y ) → (1, X). These
are respectively denoted



          X           f          Y                            Y        f       X


    As the ﬁnal example, for every set X there is an open game εX : (X, X) → (1, 1)
called a counit, which is denoted by

                                            X



                                            X

Covariant computations, contravariant computations and counits are related by the counit
law [13, sections 2.2.13 and 2.3.6], which states that for every function f : X → Y , the
diagram

                                           f ⊗ (1, Y )
                                 (X, Y )                 (Y, Y )


                                     (X, 1) ⊗ f ∗            εY

                                                εX
                                 (X, X)                  (1, 1)

commutes. In diagrammatic notation, this is the equation
                       COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                   7



           Y                                               Y           f

                                               =

           X           f                                   X


    A scalar in a monoidal category is an endomorphism of the monoidal unit [2]. The
monoidal unit in the category of open games is (1, 1), and therefore a scalar G consists of
a set ΣG and a best response function BG : ΣG → P(ΣG ).
    Such scalars describe a useful description of games in game theory, where BG (σ) is the
set of all rational unilateral deviations σ ′ from a strategy proﬁle σ. A unilateral deviation
is a strategy proﬁle σ ′ that diﬀers from σ in the strategy of at most one player i, such that
the payoﬀ for player i after playing σ ′ is at least as large as that from playing σ. Fixpoints
of the best response function (in the sense that σ ∈ BG (σ)) are called Nash equilibria,
and are strategies with the property that no rational player has incentive to unilaterally
deviate from playing σ; Nash equilibria are ‘stable’ or ‘self-conﬁrming’ strategies. The
other values of BG (σ) are called off-equilibrium best responses, and are also characteristic
of a game. Although there is no generally accepted notion of equivalence of games,
equality of best response functions provides a useful notion that works ‘across theories’,
for example between open games and the classical formalism of von Neumann [27].
    By composing open games from the three families we have introduced using categor-
ical composition and tensor product, we can build scalars with the same best response
functions as various standard games. We will give three examples, each of which has
two players who choose from sets X and Y respectively, with payoﬀs given by a func-
tion u : X × Y → R2 . Figure 3(a) shows a game where two players make the choices
simultaneously (a well-known example being rock-paper-scissors).
    Figure 3(b) shows a ‘game of perfect information’, where the second player observes
the ﬁrst player’s choice before making her own choice. (An example of a game of perfect
information is chess, although it has more than two stages.) Notice the use of a comonoid
operator X → X ⊗ X, which is the copy function lifted as a covariant computation, to
copy the choice of the ﬁrst player, which is both observed by the second player and used
by the utility function.
    Figure 3(c) is a ‘game of imperfect information’, intermediate between the previous
two examples (an example being poker, which has both visible and private information).
There is an equivalence relation on the choices made by the ﬁrst player, and the second
player observes only the equivalence class. (The function π∼ : X → X/ ∼ is the projection
onto equivalence classes.)
    In each of these examples (and in the generalisation of them to any ﬁnite number of
players), the best response function of the scalar is equal to the best response function for
8                            JULES HEDGES




                                          R
                        D2
                                  Y

                                              u
                                      X

                        D1
                                          R

                        (a) Simultaneous game

                                                      R

                                                  R

             D1                           D2
                    X                             Y
                                                              u
                                                  X


             (b) Sequential game of perfect information

                                                          R


                                                      R
                                  X/∼
    D1                       π∼            D2
         X                                            Y
                                                                  u
                                                  X



         (c) Sequential game of imperfect information

             Figure 1: Examples of scalar open games
                           COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                           9
ordinary Nash equilibrium in standard game theory. In this sense, we have the expressive
power of ordinary game theory, but in a compositional setting.


4. Lenses
In this section we construct a category Lens whose objects are pairs (X, S) of nonempty
sets, and whose morphisms are called lenses. The category Lens has several features
in common with Game and will provide a second important example of a teleological
category.
4.1. Definition. Let X, S, Y, R be nonempty sets. A lens λ : (X, S) → (Y, R) consists
of a pair of functions λ = (vλ , uλ ) where vλ : X → Y and uλ : X × R → S.
    We think of these types as follows: X is the type of some data structure, and we can
use the lens λ to ‘zoom in’ on some part of the data structure, which has type Y . This
is done by the function vλ , which is mnemonic for ‘view’. The data that we are viewing
can then be updated, so that it now has type R, and the lens propagates this update
to the aggregate whole, whose type changes to S. This is done by the function uλ (for
‘update’), which takes the original data structure and the updated value, and returns the
new state of the data structure. As a simple example, consider a lens λ that zooms in on
the ﬁrst coordinate of a pair of integers, and allows replacing it with a boolean instead.
This lens has type λ : (Z × Z, B × Z) → (Z, B), and is given by vλ (z1 , z2 ) = z1 and
uλ ((z1 , z2 ), b) = (b, z2 ).
    The identity lens id(X,S) : (X, S) → (X, S) is given by vid(X,S) = idX : X → X and
uid(X,S) = π2 : X ×S → S. The composition of λ : (X, S) → (Y, R) and µ : (Y, R) → (Z, Q)
is given by vµ◦λ = vµ ◦ vλ and uµ◦λ (x, q) = uλ (x, uµ (vλ (x), q)).
4.2. Proposition. With these definitions, Lens is a category.
    The description of lenses given here is essentially that of ‘concrete lenses’ in [24],
which diﬀers slightly from usual presentation of lenses. (The only diﬀerence between their
deﬁnition and ours is the requirement that the sets are nonempty, which will be discussed
later.) The simplest lenses are ‘monomorphic’ lenses, which do not allow updates to change
the type of data. The category of monomorphic lenses is the full subcategory of Lens
whose objects have the form (X, X). Lenses are also usually considered to satisfy axioms
called the lens laws, that specify intuitive properties of bidirectional transformations on
data; lenses are classiﬁed as ‘well-behaved’ or ‘very well-behaved’, with most theoretical
work focussing on the very well-behaved case. These form a hierarchy of subcategories
of Lens [16]. Lenses which can change types are generally considered polymorphic (that
is to say, they can change to any type), and exist in a type system with parametric
polymorphism, in which case the lens laws imply certain constraints on the types [20,
part 4]. In this formulation, we consider lenses which in general not only fail to satisfy
the lens laws, but for which the lens laws do not even type-check.1 We choose this
  1
      Cezar Ionescu has suggested calling these ‘outlaw lenses’.
10                                       JULES HEDGES

formulation because of its application to game theory; to the author’s knowledge this is
the ﬁrst application of lenses that do not represent bidirectional transformations of data.
      The category of lenses can be given a symmetric monoidal structure, with monoidal
unit I = (1, 1). The monoidal product on objects is (X, S) ⊗ (X ′ , S ′ ) = (X × X ′ , S ×
S ′ ). On lenses it is given by vλ⊗µ (x, x′ ) = (vλ (x), vµ (x′ )) and uλ⊗µ ((x, x′ ), (r, r ′ )) =
(uλ (x, r), uµ(x′ , r ′ )). (In Edward Kmett’s popular Control.Lens library for Haskell, the
monoidal product is called alongside.)
4.3. Proposition. With these definitions, Lens is a symmetric monoidal category.
    This can either be proven directly, or using the following more abstract machinery.
Viewing lenses constitutes a monoidal ﬁbration v : Lens → Set1 , where Set1 is the
category of nonempty sets. (Note that the nonemptiness requirement is unnecessary in
this paragraph, and indeed we can build a category of lenses Lens(C) over any category
C with ﬁnite products, obtaining a monoidal ﬁbration v : Lens(C) → C; nonemptiness
will be used later.) This is reminiscent of [17], but the following additional observations
seem to be new. The ﬁbration v is the opposite (in the ﬁbrewise sense) of another
that arises in a diﬀerent context, namely, Jacobs’ ‘simple ﬁbration’ s(Set1 ) [15, section
1.3]. The ﬁbre in Lens over X is co-kl(X×)op , the opposite of the co-kleisli category
of the left-multiplication-by-X comonad (sometimes called the ‘reader comonad’). The
entire structure can be built starting from the fact that (X×) is an indexed commutative
comonad, or even more basically, from commutative comonoids using [23, proposition 2.1],
and the symmetric monoidal structure on Lens can be obtained from the ﬁbres using a
Grothendieck construction [26, theorem 12.7].
    This abstract point of view also serves to clarify another connection (implicit in [13,
section 2.2.14]), between lenses and de Paiva’s intuitionistic dialectica categories [6], using
[15, exercise 1.10.11]. However, the additional abstraction is unnecessary in this paper,
so we will continue with the concrete presentation.
    Next, we observe that there are lenses corresponding to computations and counits in
the category of open games, and they satisfy a similar ‘counit law’.
4.4. Definition. An adaptor is a lens λ : (X, S) → (Y, R) whose update function fac-
                  π2
torises as X × R −→  R → S.
    As bidirectional transformations, adaptors convert between data representations in a
reversible way. Adaptors are usually called ‘isos’, but are only guaranteed to be categorical
isomorphisms if we restrict to well-behaved lenses, so we follow the terminology of [24]
for clarity.
4.5. Proposition. Adaptors form a wide symmetric monoidal subcategory Lensd .
Proof. It is straightforward to check that Lensd is closed under composition and monoidal
product, and that identities and structure morphisms are adaptors.
                        COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                   11

    Given functions f : X → Y and g : R → S, we write (f, g) : (X, S) → (Y, R) for the
unique adaptor satisfying v(f,g) = f and u(f,g) = g ◦ π2 . This is where we use the fact
that our sets are nonempty, in order to guarantee uniqueness. (It is possible to develop
the theory without requiring nonemptiness. This leads to a deﬁnition of teleological
categories in which dualisable morphisms form a separate category, with a not-necessarily-
faithful ‘embedding’. The reason we do not do this is that it seriously complicates the
diagrammatic language by requiring functorial boxes [22], and compositional game theory
has so far never required a use of the empty set. On the other hand there are game-
theoretic reasons to study colimits in Lens, and so this may need to change in the future.)
4.6. Proposition. There is an isomorphism of symmetric monoidal categories Lensd ∼
                                                                                 =
Set1 × Setop
          1  .
Proof. It can be shown that (−, −) : Set1 × Setop
                                               1 → Lensd is a symmetric monoidal
functor, and is invertible.
4.7. Proposition. There is a symmetric monoidal functor −∗ : Lensop
                                                                 d → Lensd defined
by (X, S)∗ = (S, X) and (f, g)∗ = (g, f ).
Proof. This is trivially a symmetric monoidal functor Setop                   op
                                                         1 × Set1 → Set1 × Set1 .

    For any object (X, S) we have (X, S) ⊗ (X, S)∗ = (X × S, S × X). There is a ‘counit’
lens ε(X,S) : (X × S, S × X) → (1, 1) given by the unique vε(X,S) : X × S → 1, and
uε(X,S) ((x, s), ∗) = (s, x). This can be thought of intuitively as a lens that focuses ‘outside’
a data structure into nothing, which is represented by 1.
4.8. Proposition. For each adaptor (f, g) : (X, S) → (Y, R) the diagram

                                        (f, g) ⊗ id(R,Y )
                     (X × R, S × Y )                        (Y × R, R × Y )


                               id(X,S) ⊗(g, f )                     ε(Y,R)

                                                  ε(X,S)
                     (X × S, S × X)                              (1, 1)

commutes.
12                                          JULES HEDGES

Proof. The view functions of the two composed lenses are both the unique function
X × R → 1. For the update functions we check by direction calculation:
                     uε(Y,R) ◦((f,g)⊗id(R,Y ) ) ((x, r), ∗)
                  = u(f,g)⊗id(R,Y ) ((x, r), uε(Y,R) (v(f,g)⊗id(R,Y ) (x, r), ∗))
                  = u(f,g)⊗id(R,Y ) ((x, r), uε(Y,R) ((v(f,g) (x), vid(R,Y ) (x, r)), ∗))
                  = u(f,g)⊗id(R,Y ) ((x, r), uε(Y,R) ((f (x), r), ∗))
                  = u(f,g)⊗id(R,Y ) ((x, r), (r, f (x)))
                  = (u(f,g) (x, r), uid(R,Y ) (r, f (x)))
                  = (g(r), f (x))
                  = (uid(X,S) (x, g(r)), u(g,f )(r, x))
                  = uid(X,S) ⊗(g,f ) ((x, r), (g(r), x))
                  = uid(X,S) ⊗(g,f ) ((x, r), uε(X,S) ((x, g(r)), ∗))
                  = uid(X,S) ⊗(g,f ) ((x, r), uε(X,S) ((vid(X,S) (x), v(g,f ) (r)), ∗))
                  = uid(X,S) ⊗(g,f ) ((x, r), uε(X,S) (vid(X,S) ⊗(g,f ) (x, r), ∗))
                  = uε(X,S)◦(id(X,S) ⊗(g,f )) ((x, r), ∗)
Since the two lenses have equal view and update functions, they are equal.
    It was observed by Jeremy Gibbons that the play and coplay functions of an open game
G : (X, S) → (Y, R) can be rewritten as a single function ΣG → homLens ((X, S), (Y, R)),
and the composition and tensor of open games can be written in terms of composition
and tensor of lenses. However the connections between open games and lenses run deeper,
by observing that there are natural isomorphisms X ∼   = homLens ((1, 1), (X, S)) and Y →
  ∼
R = homLens ((Y, R), (1, 1)), allowing the best response function of an open game to also
be expressed in terms of lenses. These considerations lead to a deﬁnition of morphisms
between open games, which is however tangential to the topic of this paper.


5. Teleological categories
We will now abstract the examples from the previous two sections, the categories of open
games and lenses, into the axioms of a teleological category. These axioms capture the
features of those categories that are visible in the graphical language: a wide subcategory
of dualisable objects, a dualisation functor on that subcategory, and a family of ‘counit’
morphisms that interacts with duals via a counit law.
5.1. Definition. A teleological category is a symmetric monoidal category C, together
with:
     • A wide symmetric monoidal subcategory Cd of dualisable morphisms, with an invo-
       lutive symmetric monoidal functor −∗ : Cdop → Cd
                        COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                               13
      • An extranatural family of morphisms εX : X ⊗ X ∗ → I in C, called counits; more
        precisely, an extranatural transformation ε : F → G between F, G : Cdop × Cd → C,
        where F (S, X) = X ⊗ S ∗ and G(S, X) = I.

such that the diagrams
                                           σX ∗ ,X
                                 X∗ ⊗ X               X ⊗ X∗
                                                εX ∗        εX

                                                        I
                                                        ∗
                                      X ⊗ σX ∗ ,Y ⊗ Y
                  X ⊗ Y ⊗ X∗ ⊗ Y ∗                          X ⊗ X∗ ⊗ Y ⊗ Y ∗
                                                     εX⊗Y
                                                                       εX ⊗ εY

                                                                   I

commute for all objects X and Y .
    We will now unpack parts of this deﬁnition. Every object X of C has a chosen ‘dual’
X satisfying (X ∗ )∗ = X, I ∗ = I and (X ⊗ Y )∗ = X ∗ ⊗ Y ∗ . (In all of our examples these
  ∗

equalities will be strict, although the monoidal structure will generally not be strict.)
Certain morphisms f : X → Y , namely the dualisable morphisms, have a chosen ‘dual’
f ∗ : Y ∗ → X ∗ , functorially. Since the category of dualisable morphisms is a symmetric
monoidal subcategory, the structure morphisms are symmetries are required to be dual-
isable, and their duals are the structure morphisms and symmetries for the dual objects.
    Every object X has a chosen counit morphism εX : X ⊗ X ∗ → I, which interact
with dual objects and tensor products according to the two stated axioms. Typically the
counit morphisms will not be dualisable. (There is an alternative deﬁnition possible, in
which ε is more straightforwardly a monoidal extranatural transformation, and so can
be composed without involving the symmetry, but at the expense of twisting the dual
of a monoidal product to (X ⊗ Y )∗ = Y ∗ ⊗ X ∗ , as in the deﬁnition of a compact closed
category [21]. This leads to a diagrammatic language in which duality is rotation rather
than reﬂection, similar to [4, section 4.6.2].)
    Finally, the condition that ε is extranatural is a general ‘counit law’, stating that for
every dualisable morphism f : X → Y , the following diagram commutes:
14                                     JULES HEDGES

                                           f ⊗Y∗
                                  X ⊗Y∗              Y ⊗Y∗


                                       X ⊗ f∗                εY

                                                εX
                                  X ⊗ X∗                 I

5.2. Proposition. Lens is a teleological category.
Proof. This is proven directly by results in section 4.
   To view Game as a teleological category we must do slightly more work. We deﬁne
Gamed as the wide subcategory of Game consisting of open games G with the following
properties:

     • ΣG = 1 = {∗}, and ∗ ∈ BG (h, k)(∗) for all h, k

     • CG : 1 × X × R → S is a constant function in X

Equivalently, Gamed can be deﬁned as the wide subcategory consisting of open games of
the form
                                         f ⊗g ∗
                (X, S) ∼
                       = (X × 1, 1 × S) −−−→ (Y × 1, 1 × R) ∼
                                                            = (Y, R)
for functions f : X → Y , g : R → S.
    Given an object (X, S), the counit ε(X,S) : (X, S)⊗(X, S)∗ = (X ×S, S ×X) → (1, 1) is
the evident strategically trivial open game with Cε(X,S) (∗, (x, s), ∗) = (s, x). Equivalently,
ε(X,S) can be deﬁned as
                                                                           ∗
                                                                   idX×S ⊗σX,S
                 (X × S, S × X) ∼
                                = ((X × S) × 1, 1 × (S × X)) −−−−−−−→
                                                              εX×S
                 ((X × S) × 1, 1 × (X × S)) ∼
                                            = (X × S, X × S) −−−→ (1, 1)
5.3. Proposition. With these definitions, Game is a teleological category.
Proof. It remains to prove extranaturality of ε. The proof is essentially identical to that
of proposition 4.8 for lenses.
    The graphical calculus for teleological categories deﬁned in the next section is directly
inspired by the graphical calculus of compact closed categories. Unfortunately it is not the
case that every compact closed category can be seen as a teleological category, because the
duality in a compact closed category is not necessarily a monoidal functor, and because the
counit morphisms are not necessarily extranatural. However, in some cases it is possible
to deﬁne a duality that satisﬁes the axioms of a teleological category.
                      COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                               15
5.4. Proposition. Let Rel be the symmetric monoidal category of sets and relations,
with cartesian product of sets as the monoidal product. Then Rel is a teleological category
with Reld = Rel, where the dual of an object is X ∗ = X, the dual of a morphism is the
converse relation, and the counit morphism εX : X⊗X → I is the relation with (x1 , x2 )εX ∗
iff x1 = x2 .
Proof. Straightforward.
   Finally, a surprising pair of examples can be found in the categories of simple graphs
and ∪-matrices [3]. We illustrate the former. Recall that a PROP is a strict symmetric
monoidal category whose objects are natural numbers in which the tensor product of
natural numbers is addition. (A prototypical example is categories of matrices with the
Kronecker product.) A symmetric monoidal theory is a PROP with a presentation by
generators and relations. It is shown in [3] that a certain PROP CGraph of simple
graphs is equivalent to a symmetric monoidal theory with generators
            {∆ : 1 → 2, ⊥ : 1 → 0, ∇ : 2 → 1, ⊤ : 0 → 1, ∪ : 2 → 0, v : 0 → 1}
represented graphically as




together with a list of equations that includes



                        =                                            =


   We give CGraph the structure of a teleological category as follows. Let CGraphd be
the sub-PROP of CGraph generated by {∆, ⊥, ∇, ⊤}. There is a PROP homomorphism
−∗ : CGraphop                              ∗         ∗         ∗
               d → CGraph generated by ∆ = ∇, ⊥ = ⊤, ∇ = ∆, ⊤ = ⊥. (PROP
                                                                         ∗

homomorphisms are required to be identity-on-objects, so objects of CGraph are self-
dual.)
   We deﬁne the counit morphisms εn : n ⊕ n → 0 recursively on n. The base case is
ε0 = id0 , and the recursion is
                                   σn,1 ⊕n⊕1               1⊕ε ⊕1        ∪
             εn+1 : n ⊕ 1 ⊕ n ⊕ 1 −−−−−→ 1 ⊕ n ⊕ n ⊕ 1 −−−n−→ 1 ⊕ 1 −
                                                                    →0
5.5. Proposition. With these definitions, CGraph is a teleological category.
Proof. It remains to prove extranaturality of ε. This can easily be proven by structural
induction on morphisms of CGraphd .
16                                      JULES HEDGES

5.6. Definition. Let C and D be teleological categories. A teleological functor F : C → D
is a symmetric monoidal functor such that

     • F restricts to a symmetric monoidal functor Fd : Cd → Dd such that the diagram

                                                 Fd
                                          Cd              Dd


                                       −∗               −∗

                                                 Fdop
                                         Cdop            Ddop


       commutes

     • F (εX ) = εF (X) for all objects X of C

5.7. Lemma. Teleological categories and functors form a category TelCat, with a forget-
ful functor U : TelCat → SymMonCat.
    Teleological natural transformations can also be deﬁned in the obvious way, yielding
a 2-category.
    There is an identity-on-objects faithful teleological functor Lens → Game, deﬁned as
follows. A lens λ : (X, S) → (Y, R) is taken to a game, also denoted λ, with Σλ = 1 and
Bλ (x, k)(∗) = {∗} for all x, k. (Games with these properties are called strategically trivial
and could also be called ‘zero-player open games’.) The play and coplay functions are
given by Pλ (∗, x) = vλ (x) and Cλ (∗, x, r) = uλ (x, r). The image of adaptors under this
functor are precisely the dualisable open games. Since the functor is faithful, it identiﬁes
Lens as the wide ‘teleological subcategory’ of Game consisting of strategically trivial
open games.


6. Teleological diagrams
6.1. Definition. A teleological signature Σ consists of sets Obj(Σ), Mor(Σ) of object
symbols and morphism symbols, together with a chosen subset Mord (Σ) ⊆ Mor(Σ) of
dualisable morphism symbols, and for each morphism symbol f , a pair of words dom(f ),
cod(f ) over Obj(Σ) ∪ Obj(Σ)∗ , where Obj(Σ)∗ is the set of formal symbols x∗ for object
symbols x.
    If we ignore the set of dualisable morphism symbols (which is peculiar to teleological
categories), the remainder of this deﬁnition resembles a specialisation of autonomous
signatures to pivotal categories [25, section 4], which are the special (and common) case
of autonomous categories in which left and right duals coincide, and are involutive.
                       COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                   17
    For words we use the notation xo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xonn , where each oi is either ∗ or nothing. We
adopt the convention that x∗∗ = x is a syntactic identity, i.e. that −∗ denotes removing
a star if there is already one.
6.2. Definition. A teleological diagram over a teleological signature Σ is a diagram with
the following properties. Edges are labelled by object symbols and are also oriented. Inter-
nal nodes are labelled by morphism symbols, where if a node α is labelled by a morphism
                                  o′            o′
symbol f : xo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xomm → y11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ynn then:

   • If f : Mor(Σ) \ Mord (Σ) (that is, f is a non-dualisable morphism symbol) then α
     has the shape

                                        xm                    yn
                                         ..                    ..
                                          .         f           .
                                        x1                    y1


      where each arrow is oriented backwards (i.e. to the left) if the corresponding letter
      is decorated with ∗ , and forwards if it is not. We call α a non-dualisable node.

   • If f : Mord (Σ) is a dualisable morphism symbol then α has one of the two shapes


                         xm                   yn        yn               xm
                          ..                   ..        ..               ..
                           .       f            .         .         f      .
                         x1                   y1        y1               x1


      differing by a reflection. We define the parity π(α) = 0, 1 to distinguish these cases.

   Teleological diagrams must additionally satisfy the teleological condition, which says
that a string pointing backwards in the time-direction cannot bend around to point for-
wards. Each edge can be parameterised as [0, 1] → R × [a, b], which we write t 7→
(x(t), y(t)). We require that any stationary point of y is not a minimum. Since the pa-
rameterisation is smooth, we can impose the (slightly stronger) condition that if y ′ (t) = 0
then y ′′(t) ≤ 0.
   We extend the parity function to all nodes by deﬁning π(α) = 0 when α is a non-
dualisable internal node or an external node.
   We assume that our diagrams are suﬃciently well-behaved to make the following
lemma true. It is suﬃcient, for example, for directed edges to have continuously-varying
tangent vectors, in which case the lemma follows from the intermediate value theorem.
18                                          JULES HEDGES

6.3. Lemma. Let A be a teleological diagram, and e be a directed edge in A smoothly
parameterised by [0, 1] → R × [a, b], t 7→ (x(t), y(t)). Then one of the following is the
case:
     • y is strictly increasing

     • y is strictly decreasing

     • There is a point 0 < t < 1 such that y is strictly increasing on [0, t), has a maximum
       at t, and is strictly decreasing on (t, 1], and there is a neighbourhood of t on which x
       is either strictly increasing or strictly decreasing, so that in this neighbourhood the
       edge has one of the two forms




    This is in the spirit of similar simplifying assumptions made in the literature to prove
coherence theorems (see [25]), but contradicts the assumption in [18] for autonomous
categories that diagrams are piecewise linear. The previous lemma could also be proved
by assuming that diagrams are piecewise linear and that no piece is parallel to the x-axis.
(It is possible to motivate this by thinking of |dx/dt| as a notion of ‘signalling speed’ that
may not become inﬁnity.)
6.4. Lemma. The progressive condition on diagrams implies the teleological condition.
Proof. Suppose the teleological condition fails for some edge e with parameterisation
t 7→ (x(t), y(t)), so y(t) is a local maximum. Then for suﬃciently small ε > 0, the edge e
intersects the time-slice R × {y(t) − ε} in two places.
    As for circuit diagrams, internal nodes determine an ordering on the adjacent edges,
and diagrams determine an ordering on the edges adjacent to external nodes. We write
this as
                                                           ′                ′
                         α, A : eo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ eomm → e′1 o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ e′n on
where the oi , o′j are either ∗ if the edge is oriented backwards in the time direction (that
is, if y is decreasing in a neighbourhood of the node), or nothing if it is oriented forwards.
6.5. Definition. Let A and B be teleological diagrams in R × [a, b] over a teleological
signature Σ. A isomorphism i : A ∼ =t B between A and B consists of a label-preserving
bijection between the nodes of A and B, and a label-preserving bijection between the edges
of A and B, both written i, such that
     • For each internal node α of A with π(α) = π(i(α)),
                                                                 ′               ′
                                  α : eo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ eom1 → e′1 o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ e′n on
                        COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                       19
      iff
                                                                             ′                ′
                       i(α) : i(e1 )o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(em )om → i(e′1 )o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(e′n )on

   • For each internal node α of A with π(α) 6= π(i(α)),
                                                                 ′               ′
                                 α : eo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ eomm → e′1 o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ e′n on

      iff
                                   ′                     ′
                     i(α) : i(e′1 )o1 ∗ ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(e′n )on ∗ → i(e1 )o1 ∗ ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(em )om ∗

   • For each external node β of A, β is adjacent to edge e iff i(β) is adjacent to edge
     i(e), and
                                                          ′                ′
                           A : eo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ eomm → e′1 o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ e′n on
      iff
                                                                         ′                ′
                        B : i(e1 )o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(em )om → i(e′1 )o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ i(e′n )on

   In words, an isomorphism A ∼   =t B is an oriented version of equivalence of string
diagrams (deﬁnition 2.3), in which only dualisable nodes may optionally be reﬂected.
6.6. Lemma. ∼
            =t is an equivalence relation on teleological diagrams.
Proof. Straightforward.
    By the usual method of [19] we build a symmetric monoidal category Dt (Σ) whose ob-
jects are words over Σ∪Σ∗ , and whose morphisms are ∼   =t -equivalence classes of teleological
categories.
    We take the category Dt (Σ)d of dualisable morphisms to be the wide subcategory
consisting of teleological diagrams whose internal nodes are all labelled by dualisable
morphism symbols, and which satisfy the progressive condition. The functor i : Dt (Σ)d →
Dt (Σ) is inclusion. This is a subcategory by lemma 6.4, and because the identity morphism
on a word is a diagram containing no internal nodes and which is progressive.
    Duality on words is deﬁned by (xo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xonn )∗ = xo11 ∗ ⊗ · · · ⊗ xonn ∗ , recalling our
convention that x∗∗ = x. Duality on diagrams whose nodes are all dualisable is deﬁned
by reﬂection in the horizontal (time) direction. For example, the dual of the diagram



                       x3                            h                               y3

                       x2                                                            y2

                       x1                            z               g               y1
                                       f


(which is a morphism x1 ⊗ x∗2 ⊗ x3 → y1∗ ⊗ y2 ⊗ y3 in Dt (Σ)d ) is
20                                         JULES HEDGES

                                              x3

                                              x2

                                              x1

                                              x3

                                              x2

                                              x1


                            Figure 2: Example of counit in Dt (Σ)



                      y3                            h                            x3

                      y2                                                         x2

                      y1              g             z                            x1
                                                                   f


(which is a morphism y1 ⊗ y2∗ ⊗ y3∗ → x∗1 ⊗ x2 ⊗ x∗3 ). It is straightforward to show that
this construction is well-deﬁned on ∼   =t -equivalence classes, and that it deﬁnes a symmetric
                     ∗         op
monoidal functor − : Dt (Σ)d → Dt (Σ)d .
    Given an object xo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xonn , the counit

                    εxo11 ⊗···⊗xonn : xo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xonn ⊗ xo11 ∗ ⊗ · · · ⊗ xonn ∗ → I

in Dt (Σ) is (the ∼
                  =t -equivalence class of) the obvious diagram consisting of n interleaved
caps. For example,

                         εx1 ⊗x∗2 ⊗x3 : x1 ⊗ x∗2 ⊗ x3 ⊗ x∗1 ⊗ x2 ⊗ x∗3 → I

is the diagram depicted in ﬁgure 2. Extranaturality requires certain equalities between
morphisms in Dt (Σ), which means isomorphisms between diagrams. These can easily be
seen. For example, for a dualisable morphism symbol f : x1 ⊗ x∗2 → y1∗ ⊗ y2 there is an
isomorphism
                      COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                               21

           y2                                           y2
                                                                    f
           y1                                           y1
                                             ∼
                                             =t
           x2                                           x2
                      f
           x1                                           x1


6.7. Proposition. Let Σ be a teleological signature. The above construction defines a
teleological category Dt (Σ).
   Dt (Σ) is also equipped with an obvious valuation vΣ : Σ → Dt (Σ), taking each mor-
phism symbol f to the diagram containing only one f -labelled internal node.


7. Coherence for teleological diagrams
In this section we will prove the following coherence theorem, which states that Dt (Σ) is
the free teleological category on Σ.
7.1. Theorem. [Coherence theorem for teleological categories] Let Σ be a teleological
signature, C a teleological category and w : Σ → C a valuation. Then there exists a
teleological functor F : Dt (Σ) → C such that w = F ◦ vΣ , unique up to unique teleological
natural isomorphism.
    The following is a summary of the proof method. Given an isomorphism of teleological
diagrams, we show that it can be factored into three parts (lemma 7.8): ﬁrst translate
nodes without reﬂecting, then reﬂect a single sub-diagram, then ﬁnally translate without
reﬂecting again. This is proved by a combinatorial analysis of the possible connections
in a diagram, ultimately resulting on lemma 6.3. For the isomorphisms not involving
reﬂections we appeal to the Joyal-Street coherence theorem (theorem 2.4) for an expanding
signature, and the single reﬂection is an instance of extranaturality.
    We begin by putting lemma 6.3 into a discrete form that is more practical to work
with. Consider a general internal node of a teleological diagram, either dualisable or
non-dualisable. There are four ways in which an edge can connect to the node:

                  contravariant output              contravariant input
                                             f
                        covariant input             covariant output

Notice that reﬂecting a dualisable node preserves inputs and outputs, but interchanges
covariant and contravariant connections.
22                                      JULES HEDGES

7.2. Definition. Given a directed edge e from an internal node α to an internal node β,
we write e : αp → β q where p, q : {+, −}, where + represents a covariant connection and
− a contravariant connection. We extend this notation to external nodes as follows. If β
is an external node in R × {a} then we write β + when it is the source node of its (unique)
adjacent edge, and β − when it is the target node. If β is in R × {b} then we write β −
when it is the source node and β + when it is the target node.
   For example, if the connection between e and α is a covariant output, and the con-
nection between e and β is a contravariant input, we write e : α+ → β − .
7.3. Definition. Given nodes α, β in a teleological diagram we write α < β if α strictly
precedes β in the time direction.
   This deﬁnes a preorder on nodes, in which two nodes are incomparable iﬀ they are
not equal and are located in the same time-slice. Of course, this notion is not invariant
under equivalences of diagrams.
7.4. Lemma. Let A be a teleological diagram, with a directed edge e : α → β.
     • If e : α+ → β + then α < β.
     • If e : α− → β − then α > β.
     • It is not the case that e : α− → β + .
Proof. Follows from lemma 6.3.
7.5. Definition. Given an equivalence i : A ∼  =t B and a node α in A, if π(α) 6= π(i(α))
we write i ⊲⊳ α and say that i reﬂects α; otherwise, we write i 6⊲⊳ α.
   Note that i 6⊲⊳ α whenever α is a non-dualisable internal node or an external node.
7.6. Lemma. Let A and B be teleological diagrams and i : A ∼     =t B, and let e : α → β be
an edge in A. If i 6⊲⊳ α and i ⊲⊳ β then one of the following is the case:
     • e : α+ → β + , i(e) : i(α)+ → i(β)− and α < β
     • e : α+ → β − , i(e) : i(α)+ → i(β)+ and i(α) < i(β)
If i ⊲⊳ α and i 6⊲⊳ β then one of the following is the case:
     • e : α− → β − , i(e) : i(α)+ → i(β)− and α > β
     • e : α+ → β − , i(e) : i(α)− → i(β)− and i(α) > i(β)
If i ⊲⊳ α and i ⊲⊳ β then one of the following is the case:
     • e : α+ → β + , i(e) : i(α)− → i(β)− , α < β and i(α) > i(β)
     • e : α− → β − , i(e) : i(α)+ → i(β)+ , α > β and i(α) < i(β)
Proof. For each case we consider the 3 possible variances of e : α → β, with e : α− → β +
ruled out by lemma 7.4. In each case the remaining variance not listed would imply that
i(e) : i(α)− → i(β)+ , which is again disallowed. The ordering constraints on the permitted
cases also follow from lemma 7.4.
                      COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                23



                                                        g
                            x     g         ∼                      x
                      f                     =t

                                                        f




                                                        f

                      g     x               ∼                      x
                                  f         =t

                                                        g




                            x     g         ∼           g      x
                      f                     =t                         f



                                Figure 3: Cases of lemma 7.6

   Examples of these three cases are illustrated in ﬁgure 3.
7.7. Definition. Let Σ be a teleological signature and A, B teleological diagrams over
Σ. We write i : A ∼
                  =c B if i : A ∼
                                =t B and i 6⊲⊳ α for all nodes α of A.
7.8. Lemma. [Normal-form lemma] Let Σ be a teleological signature, and let A and B be
teleological diagrams over Σ with A ∼=t B. Then there exist teleological diagrams A′ ∼ =c A
       ′ ∼                 ′      ′
and B =c B such that A and B are respectively of the form depicted in figure 4, where
P and Q are sub-diagrams with Q in Dt (Σ)d . Note that the particular edge orientations
depicted are for illustration, and that the reflected Q in the diagram for B ′ refers to the
dual Q∗ , i.e. the diagram obtained by reflecting the diagram Q.

Proof. Let i : A ∼  =t B be the equivalence. We will construct P and Q such that P
contains the nodes α of A with i 6⊲⊳ α, and Q contains those with i ⊲⊳ α. The external
nodes of A are of the former kind, and add them as external nodes to P . (These are the xi ,
24                                       JULES HEDGES

                                 yn′ ′                              yn′ ′
                        ..                                            ..
                         .       y1′                                   .    Q

                                                                    y1′
                      x′m′
                        ..
                             Q
                                                                      ..    x′m′
                 P       .                                    P        .
                       x′1                                                      x′1
     xm                                   yn      xm                                  yn
      ..                                   ..      ..                                  ..
       .                                    .       .                                   .
     x1                                   y1      x1                                  y1



                             Figure 4: A′ and B ′ in lemma 7.8

yj in ﬁgure 4.) We preserve the relative positions of the nodes within these sub-diagrams.
We must check all of the ways in which nodes may be connected.
       Any edge e : α → β in A between nodes of P is also added to the diagram P . Similarly
we add any edge in A between nodes of Q to Q. In the latter case, by lemma 7.6 it must
be the case that either e : α+ → β + or e : α− → β − .
       For each edge e : α → β for α in P and β in Q, by lemma 7.6 either e : α+ → β + or
e : α+ → β − . In both cases we add an edge ep : α+ → p(e)+ to P , for p(e) a fresh covariant
output external node of P . In the former case we also add an edge eq : q(e)+ → β + to
Q, for q(e) a fresh covariant input external node of Q, and an edge p(e)+ → q(e)+ to A′
(of the form x′1 in ﬁgure 4). In the latter case we add eq : q(e)− → β − , for q(e) a fresh
contravariant input external node of Q, and an edge p(e)+ → q(e)− to A′ (of the form
yn′ ′ ).
       In the dual case e : α → β for α in Q and β in P , by lemma 7.6 either e : α− → β − or
e : α+ → β − . In either case we add an edge ep : p(e)− → β − , for p(e) a fresh contravariant
input external node of P . In the former case we also add an edge eq : α− → q(e)− to Q,
for q(e) a fresh contravariant output external node of Q, and an edge q(e)− → p(e)− to
A′ (of the form x′m′ ). In the latter case we add eq : α+ → q(e)+ , for q(e) a fresh covariant
output external node of Q, and an edge q(e)+ → p(e)− to A′ (of the form y1′ ).
       Considering external nodes of A as external nodes of P means that an edge e : α → β
for α a covariant input external node of A (of the form x1 ) and β in Q leads to a ‘bypass’
edge ep : α+ → e(p)+ in P that does not connect to any internal node of P ; similarly for
e : α → β − for α in Q and β a contravariant output external node of A (of the form xm ).
Furthermore, any edge (in either direction) between a node of Q and either a covariant
output or contravariant input external node of A would necessarily be either of the form
e : α+ → β + with i ⊲⊳ α and i 6⊲⊳ β, or e : α− → β − with i 6⊲⊳ α and i ⊲⊳ β, both of which
are ruled out by lemma 7.6.
                       COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                   25

    All edges added to Q by this construction are of the form α+ → β + or α− → β − . It
follows that Q satisﬁes the progressive condition.
    We have A ∼=c A′ by construction, and it is also straightforward to see that B ∼
                                                                                   =c B ′ .
7.9. Definition. Let Σ be a teleological signature. We define a monoidal signature M(Σ)
as follows. The object symbols are
             Obj(M(Σ)) = Obj(Σ) ∪ Obj(Σ)∗ = Obj(Σ) ∪ {x∗ | x : Obj(Σ)}
and the morphism symbols are
                  Mor(M(Σ)) = Mor(Σ) ∪ Mord (Σ)∗ ∪ {εx | x : Obj(Σ)}
                           o′           o′
If f : xo11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xomm → y11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ynn in Σ then it also has this type in M(Σ), together
with
                                   o′ ∗            ′
                            f ∗ : y11 ⊗ · · · ⊗ ynon ∗ → xo11 ∗ ⊗ · · · ⊗ xm
                                                                           om ∗


with x∗∗ = x as a syntactic equality. Finally, we set εx : x ⊗ x∗ → I for each x : Obj(Σ).
7.10. Lemma. Let Σ be a teleological signature. There is an identity-on-objects symmetric
monoidal functor E : Dc (M(Σ)) → U(Dt (Σ)) defined by embedding ∼   =c -equivalence classes
into ∼
     =t -equivalence classes, where U is the forgetful functor TelCat → SymMonCat.
7.11. Definition. Let Σ be a teleological signature and A a teleological diagram over Σ.
We define a circuit diagram C(A) over M(Σ) as follows. For each node α of A labelled
by a morphism symbol f we add a node at the same position in C(A) labelled by f if
π(α) = 0, and labelled by f ∗ if π(α) = 1. For each edge e labelled by an object symbol x,
let t 7→ (x(t), y(t)) be a smooth parameterisation, and case split on lemma 6.3.
   • If y is strictly increasing, we add an edge in C(A) with the same parameterisation,
     labelled by x.
   • If y is strictly decreasing, we add an edge in C(A) with the reversed parameterisation
     t 7→ (x(−t), y(−t)), labelled by x∗ .
   • In the remaining case, let t be the parameter of the turning point. Add a new
     node at position (x(t), y(t)), labelled by the morphism symbol εx . Add an edge from
     (x(0), y(0)) to the new node labelled by x, and from (x(1), y(1)) to the new node la-
     belled by x∗ . (The new edges can follow the same path as the original one, although
     if x(t) is locally decreasing at (x(t), y(t)) we need to slightly alter the parameterisa-
     tion, so that the x-labelled edge enters below and the x∗ -labelled edge above, to match
     the type εx : x ⊗ x∗ → I.)
   An example of this construction is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.
                                                          =c B iff C(A) ∼
7.12. Lemma. Let A and B be teleological diagrams. Then A ∼             =c C(B).
   Note that the former refers to isomorphism of teleological diagrams without rotations
(deﬁnition 7.7), while the latter refers to isomorphism of circuit diagrams (deﬁnition 2.3).
26                                     JULES HEDGES




                         f                                      x
                                                       f

                                           7→                        εx

                          g       x                    g∗       x∗




                         Figure 5: Example construction of C(A)

Proof. Given an isomorphism i : A ∼       =c B of teleological diagrams it is straightforward
to construct an equivalence C(i) : C(A) ∼      =c C(B) of circuit diagrams, and conversely.
The only interesting case is when there is an edge e : α+ → β − in A with a maximum at
(x(t), y(t)). Since i 6⊲⊳ α and i 6⊲⊳ β we also have i(e) : i(α)+ → i(β)− , and hence i(e) also
has a maximum at some (x′ (t′ ), y ′(t′ )). These maxima correspond to fresh nodes in C(A)
and C(B) respectively, and we construct C(i) to associate them.
Proof of theorem 7.1. We begin by extending w to a monoidal valuation M(w) :
M(Σ) → U(C) by setting M(w)(x∗ ) = w(x)∗ , M(w)(f ∗ ) = w(f )∗ and M(w)(εx ) = εw(x) .
By the Joyal-Street coherence theorem (theorem 2.4), we have a symmetric monoidal
functor G : Dc (M(Σ)) → C such that M(w) = G ◦ vM (Σ) , unique up to unique monoidal
natural isomorphism.
    We will prove that this G is a teleological functor. More formally, recall from deﬁnition
5.6 that a teleological functor F : Dt (Σ) → C is a symmetric monoidal functor satisfying
additional properties. We will prove that G factors as
                                             E              F
                                Dc (M(Σ)) −→ Dt (Σ) −→ C
and then that F satisﬁes the conditions of a teleological functor. This amounts to proving
that G is deﬁned on morphisms of Dt (Σ), which are ∼    =t -equivalence classes, and that it
respects duals and counits. Intuitively, this is possible because although G is only a
symmetric monoidal functor, the additional teleological structure is preserved by the
valuation vM (Σ) .
    First we prove that G is deﬁned on ∼
                                       =t -equivalence classes, Let A and B be teleological
diagrams over Σ with A ∼  =t B.  By lemma  7.8, we have teleological diagrams A′ ∼ =c A and
  ′ ∼              ′       ′
B =c B where A and B have the form depicted in ﬁgure 4. By lemma 7.12 we have
M(A′ ) ∼=c M(A) and M(B ′ ) ∼  =c M(B). Since G is deﬁned on ∼     =c -equivalence classes of
circuit diagrams, it follows that G(M(A′ )) = G(M(A)) and G(M(B ′ )) = G(M(B)).
    We next prove that G(M(A′ )) = G(M(B ′ )). Since G is a symmetric monoidal functor,
these expressions factorise as
            G(M(A′ )) = (Y ⊗ (εY ′ ◦ (G(M(Q)) ⊗ Y ′∗ ))) ◦ G(M(P )) : X → Y
                       COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                                        27

           G(M(B ′ )) = (Y ⊗ (εX ′ ◦ (X ′ ⊗ G(M(Q))∗ ))) ◦ G(M(P )) : X → Y
where

                                X = G(x1 )o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ G(xm )om
                                              ′                     ′
                                Y = G(y1 )o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ G(yn )on
                                              ′′                        ′′
                               X ′ = G(x′1 )o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ G(x′m′ )om′
                                              ′′′                       ′′′
                               Y ′ = G(y1′ )o1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ G(yn′ ′ )on′

using the notation of ﬁgure 4. The equality then follows from extranaturality of ε:

                                         G(Q) ⊗ G(Y ′ )∗
               G(X ′ ) ⊗ G(Y ′ )∗                                         G(Y ′ ) ⊗ G(Y ′ )∗


                        G(X ′ ) ⊗ G(Q)∗                                               εG(Y ′ )

                                                    εG(X ′ )
              G(X ′ ) ⊗ G(X ′ )∗                                                  I

    This completes the proof that G is deﬁned on ∼ =t -equivalence classes. Consequently,
we have deﬁned a symmetric monoidal functor F : Dt (Σ) → C satisfying w = F ◦ vΣ .
    Next we must prove that remaining conditions of deﬁnition 5.6 to show that F is
a teleological functor. The ﬁrst condition is that F (X ∗ ) = F (X)∗ , and similarly for
dualisable morphisms. Since all objects of Dt (Σ) are generated by objects of the form
vΣ (x), and F is a monoidal functor, it suﬃces to prove it for those:

             F (vΣ (x)∗ ) = G(vM (Σ) (x∗ ))                    by deﬁnition of F
                          = M(w)(x∗ )                          since M(w) = G ◦ vM (Σ)
                          = w(x)∗                              by deﬁnition of M(w)
                          = F (vΣ (x))∗                        since w = F ◦ vΣ

Similarly, for diagrams of the form vΣ (f ) for f : Mord (Σ),

   F (vΣ (f )∗ ) = F (E(vM (Σ) (f ∗ ))) = G(vM (Σ) (f ∗ )) = M(w)(f ∗ ) = w(f )∗ = F (vΣ (f ))∗

   In order to prove that F (εX ) = εF (X) for all objects X, we work by structural induction
on X. If X = vΣ (x) then

             F (εvΣ (x) ) = G(vM (Σ) (εx ))                    by deﬁnition of F
                          = M(w)(εx )                          since M(w) = G ◦ vM (Σ)
                          = εw(x)                              by deﬁnition of M(w)
                          = εF (vΣ (x))                        since w = F ◦ vΣ
28                                                 JULES HEDGES

If X = vΣ (x)∗ then

     F (εvΣ (x)∗ ) = F (σvΣ (x)∗ ,vΣ (x) ◦ εvΣ (x) )               axiom of teleological categories
                   = σF (vΣ (x)∗ ),F (vΣ (x)) ◦ F (εvΣ (x) )       since F is a symmetric monoidal functor
                   = σF (vΣ (x)∗ ),F (vΣ (x)) ◦ εF (vΣ (x))        by the previous case
                   = σF (vΣ (x))∗ ,F (vΣ (x)) ◦ εF (vΣ (x))        since F (vΣ (x)∗ ) = F (vΣ (x))∗
                   = εF (vΣ (x))∗                                  axiom of teleological categories
                   = εF (vΣ (x)∗ )                                 since F (vΣ (x)∗ ) = F (vΣ (x))∗

Similarly, if X = X1 ⊗ X2 then

                F (εX1 ⊗X2 ) = F ((X1 ⊗ σX1∗ ,X2 ⊗ X2∗ ) ◦ (εX1 ⊗ εX2 ))
                               = (F (X1 ) ⊗ σF (X1∗ ),F (X2 ) ⊗ F (X2∗ )) ◦ (F (εX1 ) ⊗ F (εX2 ))
                               = (F (X1 ) ⊗ σF (X1 )∗ ,F (X2 ) ⊗ F (X2 )∗ ) ◦ (εF (X1 ) ⊗ εF (X2 ) )
                               = εF (X1 )⊗F (X2 )
                               = εF (X1 ⊗X2 )

   Finally we come to uniqueness. Let F ′ : Dt (Σ) → C be another teleological functor
with w = F ′ ◦ vΣ . This extends to a symmetric monoidal functor
                                                               E          F′
                                           Dc (M(Σ)) −→ Dt (Σ) −→ C

which is equal to G by uniqueness. Repeating the construction of F from G, we conclude
that F = F ′ .


References
 [1] Faris Abou-Saleh, James Cheney, Jeremy Gibbons, James McKinna, and Perdita
     Stevens. Notions of bidirectional computation and entangled state monads. In Math-
     ematics of program construction 2015, volume 9129 of Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science. Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-19797-5_9.

 [2] Samson Abramsky. Abstract scalars, loops, and free traced and strongly compact
     closed categories. In Proceedings of CALCO’05, volume 3629 of Lectures notes in
     computer science, pages 1–29, 2005. doi:10.1007/11548133_1.

 [3] Apiwat Chantawibul and Pawel Sobociński. Towards compositional graph the-
     ory. In Proceedings of MFPS’15, volume 319 of ENTCS, pages 121–136, 2015.
     doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2015.12.009.

 [4] Bob Coecke and Aleks Kissinger. Picturing quantum processes. Cambridge University
     Press, 2017.
                      COHERENCE FOR LENSES AND OPEN GAMES                             29

 [5] Bob Coecke and Raymond Lal.          Causal categories:  Relativistically
     interacting processes.   Foundations of physics, 43(4):458–501, 2013.
     doi:10.1007/s10701-012-9646-8.

 [6] Valeria de Paiva. The dialectica categories. Technical report, University of Cam-
     bridge, 1991.

 [7] Andrea Falcon.      Aristotle on causality. In The Stanford Encyclo-
     pedia of Philosophy (Spring 2015 edition) [online].     2015.    URL:
     https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/aristotle-causality/.

 [8] Brendan Fong. The algebra of open and interconnected systems. PhD thesis, Univer-
     sity of Oxford, 2016.

 [9] Nate Foster, Michael Greenwald, Jonathan Moore, Benjamin Pierce, and Alan
     Schmidt. Combinators for bi-directional tree transformations: a linguistic approach
     to the view update problem. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and
     Systems, 29(3), 2007. doi:10.1145/1232420.1232424.

[10] Nate Foster, Kazutaka Matsuda, and Janis Voigtländer. Three complementary ap-
     proaches to bidirectional programming. In Jeremy Gibbons, editor, Generic and
     indexed programming, volume 7470 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     1–42, 2012.

[11] Neil Ghani, Jules Hedges, Viktor Winschel, and Philipp Zahn. A compositional
     approach to economic game theory. arXiv:1603.04641, 2016.

[12] David Goforth and David Robinson. The topology of the 2 × 2 games: A new periodic
     table. Routledge advances in game theory. Routledge, 2005.

[13] Jules Hedges. Towards compositional game theory. PhD thesis, Queen Mary Univer-
     sity of London, 2016.

[14] Martin Hofmann, Benjamin Pierce, and Daniel Wagner. Symmetric lenses. In
     Proceedings of the 38th annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT symposium on Prin-
     ciples of programming languages (POPL’11), volume 46, pages 371–384, 2011.
     doi:10.1145/1926385.1926428.

[15] Bart Jacobs. Categorical logic and type theory. Studies in logic and the foundations
     of mathematics. Elsevier, 1999.

[16] Michael Johnson and Robert Rosebrugh. Spans of lenses. In Proceedings of the Work-
     shops of the EDBT/ICDT 2014 Joint Conference, volume 1133 of CEUR Workshop
     Proceedings, pages 112–118, 2014.
30                                  JULES HEDGES

[17] Michael Johnson, Robert Rosebrugh, and R. J. Wood. Lenses, ﬁbrations and univer-
     sal transformations. Mathematical structures in computer science, 22(1):25–42, 2011.
     doi:10.1017/S0960129511000442.

[18] André Joyal and Ross Street. Planar diagrams and tensor algebra. Unpublished
     manuscript, 1988.

[19] André Joyal and Ross Street. The geometry of tensor calculus I. Advances in math-
     ematics, 88(1):55–112, 1991. doi:10.1016/0001-8708(91)90003-P.

[20] Artyom    Kazak.          Lenses          over    tea     [online].           URL:
     https://artyom.me/#lens-over-tea.

[21] G. M. Kelly and M. L. Laplaza. Coherence for compact closed categories. Journal of
     pure and applied algebra, 19(193–213), 1980. doi:10.1016/0022-4049(80)90101-2.

[22] Paul-André Melliès. Functorial boxes in string diagrams. In Proceedings of
     CSL 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–30. Springer, 2006.
     doi:10.1007/11874683_1.

[23] Dusko Pavlovic. Geometry of abstraction in quantum computation. Proceedings of
     Symposia in Applied Mathematics, 71:233–267, 2012.

[24] Matthew Pickering, Jeremy Gibbons, and Nicolas Wu. Profunctor optics: Modu-
     lar data accessors. The art, science and engineering of programming, 1(2), 2017.
     doi:10.22152/programming-journal.org/2017/1/7.

[25] Peter Selinger. A survey of graphical languages for monoidal categories. In Bob
     Coecke, editor, New structures for physics, pages 289–355. Springer, 2011.

[26] Michael Shulman. Framed bicategories and monoidal ﬁbrations. Theory and appli-
     cations of categories, 20(18):650–738, 2008.

[27] John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern. Theory of games and economic be-
     haviour. Princeton university press, 1944.
